24.0.0.7-beta-blog (#3849)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2024-07-02-24.0.0.7-beta.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Enhancements in Jakarta RESTful Web Services 4.0 and more in 24.0.0.7-beta"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/ramkumar-k-9286
author_github: https://github.com/ramkumar-k-9286
seo-title: Enhancements in Jakarta RESTful Web Services 4.0 and more in 24.0.0.7-beta - OpenLiberty.io

> seo-description: The 24.0.0.7-beta release introduces enhancements to Jakarta RESTful Web Services 4.0, including new API methods and media type values. It also includes enhanced HTTP request tracking and the beta release of the Audit 2.0 feature, which creates rest handler records only when a rest handler application is configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seo-description: The 24.0.0.7-beta release introduces enhancements to Jakarta RESTful Web Services 4.0, including new API methods and media type values. It also includes enhanced HTTP request tracking and the beta release of the Audit 2.0 feature, which creates REST Handler records only when a REST Handler application is configured.
```

> blog_description: The 24.0.0.7-beta release introduces enhancements to Jakarta RESTful Web Services 4.0, including new API methods and media type values. It also includes enhanced HTTP request tracking and the beta release of the Audit 2.0 feature, which creates rest handler records only when a rest handler application is configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
blog_description: The 24.0.0.7-beta release introduces enhancements to Jakarta RESTful Web Services 4.0, including new API methods and media type values. It also includes enhanced HTTP request tracking and the beta release of the Audit 2.0 feature, which creates REST Handler records only when a REST Handler application is configured.
```

open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---
= Enhancements in Jakarta RESTful Web Services 4.0 and more in 24.0.0.7-beta
Ramkumar K <https://github.com/ramkumar-k-9286>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> The 24.0.0.7-beta release introduces enhancements to Jakarta RESTful Web Services 4.0, including new API methods and media type values. It also includes enhanced HTTP request tracking and the beta release of the Audit 2.0 feature, which creates rest handler records only when a rest handler application is configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The 24.0.0.7-beta release introduces enhancements to Jakarta RESTful Web Services 4.0, including new API methods and media type values. It also includes enhanced HTTP request tracking and the beta release of the Audit 2.0 feature, which creates REST Handler records only when a REST Handler application is configured.
```

The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 24.0.0.7-beta includes the following beta features (along with link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html[all GA features]):

* <<webservices, Jakarta Restful Web Services 4.0 (EE11)>>
* <<monitor10, Enhanced HTTP Request Monitoring with Monitor 1.0>>
* <<faces41, Jakarta EE11 Faces 4.1>>

> * <<audit20, Use the Audit 2.0 feature to avoid generating unnecessary rest handler records>>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* <<audit20, Use the Audit 2.0 feature to avoid generating unnecessary REST Handler records>>
```

// // // // // // // //

See also link:{url-prefix}/blog/?search=beta&key=tag[previous Open Liberty beta blog posts].

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/28707
// Contact/Reviewer: jim-krueger
// // // // // // // // 
[#webservices]
== Jakarta Restful Web Services 4.0 (EE11)

Jakarta RESTful Web Services provides a foundational API to develop web services based on the REST architectural pattern. The Jakarta Restful Web Services 4.0 update introduces several enhancements to make web service development more efficient and effective.

The new features, `restfulWS-4.0` and `restfulWSClient-4.0`, are primarily aimed at application developers. This release brings incremental improvements to Jakarta RESTful Web Services. It provides the following new convenience API methods:

- The `containsHeaderString()` method is added to `ContainerRequestContext`, `ContainerResponseContext`, and `HttpHeaders` to help determine whether a header contains a specified value.
- The `UriInfo.getMatchedResourceTemplate()` method is a new addition that returns a full template for a request.

> - New `MediaType` values , to handle specific media types are introduced, including `APPLICATION_JSON_PATCH_JSON` and `APPLICATION_MERGE_PATCH_JSON`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- New `MediaType` values to handle specific media types are introduced, including `APPLICATION_JSON_PATCH_JSON` and `APPLICATION_MERGE_PATCH_JSON`.
```

These updates streamline the process of developing RESTful services. To implement these new features, add the following code to your `server.xml` file.

> For the RESTful web services feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the RESTful web services feature:
```

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
    <feature>restfulWS-4.0</feature>
</featureManager>
----

> For the RESTful web services client feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the RESTful web services client feature:
```

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
    <feature>restfulWSClient-4.0</feature>
</featureManager>
----

For more information, see the Jakarta RESTful Web Services 4.0 link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/4.0/[specification] and the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/4.0/apidocs/jakarta.ws.rs/module-summary[Javadoc].

    
// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/28693
// Contact/Reviewer: Channyboy
// // // // // // // // 
[#monitor10]
== Enhanced HTTP Request Monitoring with Monitor 1.0

> Open Liberty introduces a significant update that enhances the tracking of HTTP connections that are made to the server. With the Monitor-1.0 feature (`monitor-1.0`) and any JEE10 feature that uses the servlet engine, Open Liberty can now record detailed information about HTTP requests into an `HttpStatsMXBean`. This includes the request method, response status, duration, HTTP route, and other attributes that align with the Open Telemetry HTTP metric semantic convention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open Liberty introduces a significant update that enhances the tracking of HTTP connections that are made to the server. With the Monitor-1.0 feature (`monitor-1.0`) and any Jakarta EE 10 feature that uses the servlet engine, Open Liberty can now record detailed information about HTTP requests into an `HttpStatsMXBean`. This includes the request method, response status, duration, HTTP route, and other attributes that align with the Open Telemetry HTTP metric semantic convention.
```

> If  the `mpMetrics-5.0` or `mpMetrics-5.1` feature is also active, Open Liberty creates corresponding HTTP metrics, such as `http.server.request.duration`, using a Timer type metric. To use these metrics effectively, configure histogram buckets explicitly for `Timer` and `Histogram` type metrics by using the MicroProfile Metrics. For more details, see the `mp.metrics.distribution.timer.buckets` property on the link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/microprofile-config-properties.html#metrics[MicroProfile Config Properties page].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If  the `mpMetrics-5.0` or `mpMetrics-5.1` feature is also active, Open Liberty creates corresponding HTTP metrics, such as `http.server.request.duration`, using a `Timer` type metric. To use these metrics effectively, configure histogram buckets explicitly for `Timer` and `Histogram` type metrics by using the MicroProfile Metrics feature. For more details, see the `mp.metrics.distribution.timer.buckets` property on the link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/microprofile-config-properties.html#metrics[MicroProfile Config Properties page].
```

> This update ensures that operations teams responsible for monitoring, can now have a detailed and comprehensive view of HTTP requests, enhancing the monitoring and management capabilities within Open Liberty environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This update ensures that operations teams responsible for monitoring can now have a detailed and comprehensive view of HTTP requests, enhancing the monitoring and management capabilities within Open Liberty environments.
```

Previously, Open Liberty tracked servlet and JAX-RS/RESTful resource requests to the server as separate MBeans (servlet MBeans and REST MBeans). This data might then be forwarded to the mpMetrics feature to create corresponding metrics. Monitoring tools like Prometheus and Grafana could visualize this metric data to showcase server performance and responsiveness.

With the new update, HTTP connections are now tracked more comprehensively, combining request details into a unified `HttpStatsMXBean`. This approach simplifies monitoring and provides a more cohesive view of server performance, making it easier for operations teams to ensure optimal server responsiveness.

> This enhancement is an auto-feature that activates with `monitor-1.0` and any feature that uses the servlet engine, currently supporting JEE 10 features like `servlet-6.0`, `pages-3.1`, and `restfulWS-3.1`. It also supports registering HTTP metrics with `mpMetrics-5.x` features. To enable this function, add the following to your `server.xml` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This enhancement is an auto-feature that activates with `monitor-1.0` and any feature that uses the servlet engine currently supporting Jakarta EE 10 features like `servlet-6.0`, `pages-3.1`, and `restfulWS-3.1`. It also supports registering HTTP metrics with `mpMetrics-5.x` features. To enable this function, add the following to your `server.xml` file:
```

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
    <feature>monitor-1.0</feature>
    <feature>servlet-6.0</feature>
    <feature>mpMetrics-5.0</feature>
</featureManager>
----

For detailed configuration, see the link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/microprofile-config-properties.html#metrics[MicroProfile Config Properties page]. 

For more information about the HTTP semantic convention used, see the link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/http/http-metrics/#metric-httpserverrequestduration[Open Telemetry HTTP semantic convention] page.
    
    
// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/28603
// Contact/Reviewer: volosied,pnicolucci
// // // // // // // // 
[#faces41]
== Jakarta EE11 Faces 4.1

> Jakarta Faces is a Model-View-Controller (MVC) framework for building web applications, offering many convenient features, such as state management and input validation. The Jakarta Faces 4.1 (`faces-4.1`) update introduces a range of incremental improvements to enhance the developer experience. These enhancements include increased use of generics in `FacesMessages` and other locations. Improved CDI integration by requiring events for `@Initialized`, `@BeforeDestroyed`, and `@Destroyed` for built-in scopes like `FlowScoped` and `ViewScoped`, and it allows injecting the current `Flow` into a backing bean. Also, a new `UUIDConverter` is added to the API, which simplifies the handling of UUIDs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jakarta Faces is a Model-View-Controller (MVC) framework for building web applications, offering many convenient features, such as state management and input validation. The Jakarta Faces 4.1 (`faces-4.1`) update introduces a range of incremental improvements to enhance the developer experience. These enhancements include increased use of generics in `FacesMessages` and other locations, as well as improved CDI integration by requiring events for `@Initialized`, `@BeforeDestroyed`, and `@Destroyed` for built-in scopes like `FlowScoped` and `ViewScoped`. The current `Flow` can also now be injected into a backing bean. Finally, a new `UUIDConverter` is added to the API, which simplifies the handling of UUIDs.
```

> This update also includes some deprecations and removals. The composite: extension tag and references to the Security Manager are removed, and the full state saving mechanism is deprecated. To enable the Jakarta Faces 4.1 feature in your application, add the following to your `server.xml` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This update also includes some deprecations and removals. The `composite:extension` tag and references to the Security Manager are removed, and the full state saving mechanism is deprecated. To enable the Jakarta Faces 4.1 feature in your application, add the following to your `server.xml` file:
```

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
    <feature>faces-4.1</feature>
</featureManager>

----

For more information, see the Jakarta Faces 4.1 link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/faces/4.1/[specification] and the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/faces/4.1/apidocs/jakarta.faces/module-summary.html[Javadoc].
    
    
// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/28557
// Contact/Reviewer: wrodrig
// // // // // // // // 
[#audit20]

> == Use the Audit 2.0 feature to avoid generating unnecessary rest handler records

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Use the Audit 2.0 feature to avoid generating unnecessary REST Handler records
```

> The Audit 2.0 feature (`audit-2.0`) is now in beta release. The feature is designed for users that are not using rest handler applications. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Audit 2.0 feature (`audit-2.0`) is now in beta release. The feature is designed for users that are not using REST Handler applications. 
```

> It provides the same audit records as the Audit 1.0 feature (`audit-1.0`) but it does not generate records for rest handler applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It provides the same audit records as the Audit 1.0 feature (`audit-1.0`) but it does not generate records for REST Handler applications.
```

> Customers that need to keep audit records for rest handler applications must continue to use the Audit 1.0 feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Customers that need to keep audit records for REST Handler applications must continue to use the Audit 1.0 feature.
```
